---
layouts: post
title: Configuring Local and Remote Backups
tags: [backup, linux, rclone, restic]
---

# Intro

It's common sense that backups are important, but do we actually configure it
properly to run every `X` hours or do we rely on _remembering_ to backup stuff
every once in a while manually?

In this post we'll learn how to leverage the backup software
[restic](https://github.com/restic/restic/) and the `cp`-like command for cloud
storage [rclone](https://rclone.org/) to create incremental backups stored both
in a local copy in a hard disk and also in a cloud service (Google Drive,
OneDrive, etc). At the end we'll also explore how to use `systemd` to schedule
regular backups.

Basically we'll use `restic` to create a encrypted backup repository in a local
hard drive and then we'll use `rclone` to upload this backup to a storage
provider. Since all your data is encrypted there is no problem in just uploading
all the data directly to a remote server. (But you could also [choose to encrypt
the data again](https://rclone.org/crypt/) with `rclone` before uploading).

# Basic setup

Before we worry about _how_ to create these backups we need to ensure we have
the necessary programs. You can find the installation instructions for both
softwares below, but note that if you are running any Linux distro it's likely
that you'll be able to install it via your package manager.

- [`restic` docs](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/020_installation.html)
- [`rclone` docs](https://rclone.org/install/)

## Restic

After installing `restic`, you'll need to create a new repository. I strongly
advise you to read the [official
doc](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/030_preparing_a_new_repo.html)
regarding this.

## Rclone

Same as before, you'll need to configure `rclone`. Please have a look into the
[official documentation](https://rclone.org/docs/) about how to configure your
desired storage provider.

# Creating your local and remote backup

Assuming you already read and understand how `restic` works, we'll just need to create a backup repository:

```bash
restic --repo /path/to/repo init
```

Than we'll need to choose which files/directories you want to backup. I'll keep
things simple here, but there are a lot more details on the [official
docs](https://restic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/040_backup.html), please take some
time to read and learn all the possibilities `restic` offers you.

```bash
restic --repo /path/to/repo backup /directory/to/backup
```

After backing up your files, we need to upload them to a remote storage. (It's
advisable to have redundancy of data).

We just need to use `rclone` to synchronize all the local files to a remote
storage. More details in the [official
doc](https://rclone.org/commands/rclone_sync/).

```bash
rclone sync /path/to/repo remote_storage_name:path/to/remote/backup
```

# Scheduling recurring backups

In this step, if you are in an operational system other than Linux you will have
to search for a similar way to schedule scripts. For linux, _if your distro
adopts `systemd`_, you could create units for both `restic` and `rclone`. I'll
leave below examples for both `service` and `timer` units:

File `restic-backup.service`:

```
[Unit]
Description=Restic - Backup
Documentation=man:restic(1)

[Service]
Type=exec
ExecCondition=test -z "$(/usr/bin/restic --repo /path/to/repo --password-file /path/to/password-file list locks --no-lock --quiet)"
ExecStart=/usr/bin/restic --repo /path/to/repo --password-file /path/to/password-file backup /home/user --tag incremental
# Resource control
Nice=19
IOSchedulingClass=best-effort
IOSchedulingPriority=7
```

File `rclone-sync-backup.service`:

```
[Unit]
Description=Rclone - Sync Local Restic Backup Into {YOUR_CLOUD_STORAGE}
Documentation=man:rclone(1)

[Service]
Type=exec
ExecCondition=test -z "$(/usr/bin/pgrep -af rclone)"
ExecStart=/usr/bin/rclone sync --verbose --create-empty-src-dirs /path/to/repo remote_storage:path/to/repo
# Resource control
Nice=19
IOSchedulingClass=best-effort
IOSchedulingPriority=7
```

The content for the timer for both services can be the same if you wish, but
you'll still have to create two different timers (`restic-backup.timer` and
`rclone-sync-backup.timer`):

```
[Unit]
Description=(Restic/Rclone) - Backup Timer

[Timer]
OnBootSec=15min
OnUnitActiveSec=5h
RandomizedDelaySec=1h

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
```

Once you create those files, I'd advise you to place them for only your user.
To do that, you'll need to create the directory for your own `systemd` files:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/systemd/user
```

And then you move your config files there:

```bash
mv restic-backup.service rclone-sync-backup.service restic-backup.timer rclone-sync-backup.timer ~/.config/systemd/user
```

Finally, you must enable and start the timers:

```bash
systemctl --user daemon-reload
systemctl --user enable --now restic-backup.timer
systemctl --user enable --now rclone-sync-backup.timer
```

And that's it! :)

Now you have your backups configured to run every few hours incrementally, so
you'll never need to worry about making them manually again (hopefully :P).

I suggest you to take your time reading both official docs for `restic` and
`rclone`, as there is waaay more cool things that can be done with this
programs.

That's it for now!

All the best & keep learning.
